---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: Make a Recommendation App
abbreviation: P2
type: project
due_date: 2020-12-04
ordering: 1 
points: 40
draft: 0
---
<a class="nu-button" href="/fall2020/course-files/projects/project02.zip" target="_blank">
    Project Starter Files <i class="fas fa-download"></i>
</a> 

For the second project, we want you to apply what you've learned to build a program that searches, filters, and displays data. Because much of what programmers do involves manipulating and making sense of data for many different purposes — from science to investigative journalism, to civic decision-making (and advocacy) — this will likely be a skill that many of you will leverage in the future if you do any kind of data analytics. Moreover, even beyond computer programming, having a more in-depth understanding of how these systems are designed and how they interconnect with one another is relevant to all of us. 

Please start on this assignment **early**: like with anything, you’ll get out of it what you put into it. You are also welcome to collaborate in groups of 2 or 3. If you do so, you must still submit your own copy of your code, and list who you collaborated with in the submission comments (so that when we run our code similarity checker, we don’t flag you and your collaborators).

## Setup: Please Read Carefully
You will need to install some dependencies and edit some files before you begin this project:

### A. Install the Python dependencies
Open your Terminal (MacOS) or Command Prompt (Windows) and execute the following commands (from any directory):
```bash
pip3 install sendgrid                        # a module to interact with Twilio
pip3 install pandas                          # a module for working with data
pip3 install ipython                         # also a module for working with data
pip3 install --upgrade certifi               # for SSL certificates
```
### B. Download the starter files
Click the "Project Starter Files" button above.

### C. Get the API access token
Modify the `apis/authentication.py` file (located inside of the apis folder) and add the course API key. To do this: 
1. Navigate to Canvas > Assignments > Project 2
2. Replace lines 8-16 of `apis/authentication.py` with the following line...
   <br>`API_TUTOR_TOKEN = '???'` <br>...but replace the ***???*** with the *actual* token.

### D. Run the verification script
On your terminal / command line, navigate to your `project02` directory. Then navigate into the `tests` directory (withing `project02`) and type:
```bash
python3 run_verification.py
```
If you get a message that looks like this...

```bash
test_token (test_authentication.TestAuthentication) ... ok
test_get_key (test_authentication.TestAuthentication) ... ok
test_malformed_query_yields_errors (test_authentication.TestAuthentication) ... ok
test__issue_get_request_only_one (test_spotify.TestSpotify) ... 
ok
test_execute_business_queries_just_one_simplified (test_yelp.TestYelp) ... 
ok
test_can_import_sendgrid (test_sendgrid.TestSendgrid) ... ok
test_can_import_sendgrid_api_module (test_sendgrid.TestSendgrid) ... ok

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 7 tests in 5.935s

OK
```

...then you're ready to begin the project. Otherwise, talk to your TA and they can help you troubleshoot.

**Note:** If you have a Mac and encounter a security (SSL) error, please open your finder and navigate to your `Applications > python3.8` folder (or whichever python version you have installed). Then, double-click on the `Install Certificates.command` file. 

## Get Started
1. Pick one of two themes: music (Spotify) or food (Yelp)
1. Get oriented with the relevant helper modules `apis.yelp`, `apis.spotify`, `apis.sendgrid`, which will help you interact with the service providers (Yelp, Spotify, and Twilio)
1. Fulfill the requirements of the assignment
1. Earn up to 10 points extra credit by completing ***optional*** enhancements

> **IMPORTANT**
> You will be using a number of web data services to complete this assignment. As such, you will be using API keys (kind of like passwords) that I pay for and manage. Please only use these keys for the course assignments. While it is certainly possible to use my sendgrid key to create a spam bot that will get me banned from Sendgrid forever, please don’t. I am trusting you. If you have other app ideas for Twitter, Spotify, Yelp, SendGrid, etc., just register for our own keys and use those. They are all free for low-volume transactions.

## Option 1: Yelp!
For option 1, you are going to use the Yelp API to create a restaurant recommendation system. I have created a yelp module for you, located in the apis folder to help you. Here is a demo video of how your program should work:

<iframe src="https://northwestern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=2fe6b4ad-9b52-4c49-8e9a-abc1011320ae&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=false&start=0&interactivity=all" width="720" height="405" style="padding: 0px; border: 1px solid #464646;" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay"></iframe>


Note: this is only one way of implementing this program, and includes some extra credit features. Feel free to do it ***your way!*** 

Please implement the following (5) required features of your restaurant recommendation system:

### 1. Allow the user to select among the Yelp restaurant categories
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more restaurant categories that can be used to filter the restaurants. To do this you will do the following:

1. Present the user with some subset from the list of available categories (see `yelp.get_categories()` for the complete list).
2. Ask the user to select one or more categories and store their selections in a variable called categories (a comma-separated list of categories).
3. Proved the user with a way to either clear out or update their selected categories.

### 2. Allow the user to set the sorting criteria
How results are ordered really matters in search. Yelp allows 4 different options for sorting results: `best_match`, `rating`, `review_count`, `distance`. Given this, the user should be able to select how they want their results to be filtered.

### 3. Allow user to view restaurants that match the selection criteria
Given the user’s selected location, categories, and sorting criteria:

1. Retrieve the restaurants, and allow the user to specify an additional keyword before executing the search (see demo).
2. Print the retrieved restaurants to the screen in some coherent format (consider using a pandas dataframe for this).

### 4. Allow the user to preview an individual restaurant
Given the matched restaurants:
1. Allow the user to preview an individual restaurant
2. This should include (a) more detail about the restaurant, and (b) some reviews of the restaurant.
3. Use the `yelp.get_businesses()` and `yelp.get_reviews()` helper functions to help you.

### 5. Allow the user to email a restaurant recommendation
After the user has previewed a restaurant, ask them if they want to email the restaurant recommendation so someone. If so, email them a link to the restaurant and some details about it. Use the `sendgrid.send_mail` function to help you.

### Extra Credit Options (Up to 10 Points)

#### [2 Points] Allow the user to select a location
You will give the user the option of selecting a location to search (which defaults to Evanston, IL). The user should be able to update this location whenever they want. Once it is set, this location will be used to filter their restaurants (Yelp requires a location).

#### [3 Points] Allow the user to set the price filters
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more price filters. The way the filters work: `1=$`, `2=$$`, `3=$$$`, and `4=$$$$`. So, if I only wanted to see $ and $$, my price filter would be: price_filter=1,2. Given this, the user should be able to select one or more price filters, and clear out their price filters if they want.

#### [2 Points] Allow the user to filter by restaurants that are “open now” 
If you have time and need extra credit, you may enhance your program by also giving the user the option of specifying only restaurants which are currently open

#### [3 Points] Extra Credit: Generate an HTML file 
Generate an HTML file with the table of recommended restaurants as well as some information about each one. Consider embedding images of the restaurants into the file.

#### [5 Points] Extra Credit: Create a Map of Restaurants
Given the HTML file you’ve just generated, figure out how to create a map of all of the restaurant recommendations (using folium).

#### [5 Points] Incorporate another information source
In addition to searching Yelp, try integrate data from Twitter (or some other source) using some of the lecture samples from Week 9. You can earn up to 5 points for each provider that you incorporate.

#### [5 Points] Figure out how to attach the HTML file to an email
Take a look at <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/40656019/python-sendgrid-send-email-with-pdf-attachment-file" target="_blank">this article</a>.

### Rubric (40 Possible Points)
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Feature</th>
            <th>Points</th>
            <th>Scoring Guidelines</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Main Program Loop</td>
            <td>5 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Loop handles errors (incorrect inputs)</li>
                    <li>Loop prompts the user for their input</li>
                    <li>Loop honors user requests</li>
                    <li>Loop does not exit unless user asks to quit</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Category selection</td>
            <td>5 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Displays categories</li>
                    <li>Allows user to select among categories</li>
                    <li>Allows user to clear out selected categories and start over</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Ordering/Sorting Criteria</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Allows user to specify their preferred ordering criteria (best_match, rating, review_count, distance).</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Previewing matching restaurants</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Results honor user’s selected location, categories, and sorting criteria</li>
                    <li>Allows the user to specify a search keyword</li>
                    <li>Prints restaurants to the screen in some coherent format (consider using a pandas dataframe for this).</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Previewing individual restaurant</td>
            <td>10 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Allows user to preview an individual restaurant</li>
                    <li>Includes detail about restaurant</li>
                    <li>Includes restaurant reviews</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Sends email</td>
            <td>6 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Successfully emails a restaurant recommendation to a user</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Code Quality</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>All functions, variables, and file_names have pneumonic names / are snake case 
                    (up to -2 points)</li>
                    <li>Code is organized and without unused or redundant code. Please remove commented out code that isn’t running (to help our graders)	
                    (up to -3 points)</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Extra credit</td>
            <td>Up to 10 points</td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li>Students completed various EC options according to the specifications above.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

                
                


## Option 2: Spotity
For option 2, you are going to use the Spotify API to create a music recommendation system. I have created a spotify module for you, located in the apis folder to help you. Here is a demo video of how your program should work:

<iframe src="https://northwestern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=15063a75-c70c-4898-a676-abc10113201e&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=false&start=0&interactivity=all" width="720" height="405" style="padding: 0px; border: 1px solid #464646;" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay"></iframe>


Note: this is only one way of implementing this program, and includes some extra credit features. Feel free to do it ***your way!*** 

Please implement the following (3) required features of your restaurant recommendation system:

### 1. Allow the user to select one or more genres of music
You will give the user the option of selecting one or more genres that can be used to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this you will do the following:
1. Present the user with a list of available genres using the `spotify.get_genres_abridged()` function — feel free to modify it.
2. Ask the user to select one or more genres and store their genre selections in a list variable called “genres”

### 2. Allow the user to select one or more artists
You will also give the user the option of selecting one or more artists that can also be used to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this you will do the following:
1. Provide a way for the user to search for and display artists (use the `spotify.get_artists()` function)
2. Provide a way for the user to select the artists they’re interested in and store the corresponding artist objects in a list variable called “artists”
3. Allow the user to either clear out or append artists to their artists list.

### 3. Generate and email song recommendations
Given the user’s selected genres and artists:
1. Retrieve the recommended tracks using the `spotify.get_similar_tracks()` function.
2. Print the retrieved tracks to the screen in some coherent format (consider using a pandas dataframe for this).
3. Ask the user if they want to email the tracks to someone, and if so, send an email of the list of track recommendations. Use the `spotify.get_formatted_tracklist_table_html()` function to help you build a nice tracklist (see the video) that can be emailed.

> **NOTE:** The `spotify.get_similar_tracks()` function’s job is to get recommendations based on seed data. As documented in the docstring, the `get_similar_tracks()` function requires at least one of the following arguments:
> * artist_ids (list): A list of artist ids 
> * track_ids (list): A list of track ids [extra credit see below]
> * genres (genres): A list of genres
>
> Spotify only allows 5 seed values (in any combination). In other words:
len(artist_ids) + len(track_ids) + len(genres) must be between 1 and 5.

### Extra Credit Options (Up to 10 Points)

#### [3 Points] Allow the user to select one or more tracks
If you have time and need extra credit, you may enhance your program by also giving the user the option of selecting one or more tracks to “seed” the Spotify song recommendations system. To do this, you will do the following:
1. Provide a way for the user to search for and display tracks
1. Provide a way for the user to select the tracks they’re interested in and store the corresponding track objects in a list variable called “tracks”
1. Allow the user to either clear out or append tracks to their tracks list.

#### [3 Points] Extra Credit: Generate an HTML file 
Generate an HTML file with the table of recommended tracks as well as some information about the artists (and tracks) that went into seeding the playlist. Consider embedding images of artists, albums, and/or audio players into the file.

#### [5 Points] Incorporate another information source
In addition to searching Spotify, try integrate data from YouTube or Twitter as well using some of the lecture samples from Week 9. You can earn up to 5 points for each provider that you incorporate. In other words: 5 points for YouTube, 5 points for Twitter, etc.

#### [5 Points] Figure out how to attach the HTML file to an email
Take a look at this article:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/40656019/python-sendgrid-send-email-with-pdf-attachment-file


### Rubric (40 Possible Points)
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Feature</th>
            <th>Points</th>
            <th>Scoring Guidelines</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Main Program Loop</td>
            <td>5 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Loop handles errors (incorrect inputs)</li>
                <li>Loop prompts the user for their input</li>
                <li>Loop honors user requests</li>
                <li>Loop does not exist unless user asks to quit</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Genre Selection</td>
            <td>8 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Displays genres</li>
                <li>Allows user to select among genres</li>
                <li>Allows user to clear out selected genres and start over</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Artist Selection</td>
            <td>12 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Allows user to search for artist</li>
                <li>Allows user to select among artists</li>
                <li>Allows user to clear out selected artists and start over</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Generate and email recommendations</td>
            <td>12 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Correctly passes arguments of correct type into the get_similar_tracks() function.</li>
                <li>Displays recommendations to screen (including track name and artist name).</li>
                <li>Successfully emails the recommendation list.</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Code Quality</td>
            <td>3 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>All functions, variables, and file_names have pneumonic names / are snake case 
                (up to -2 points)</li>
                <li>Code is organized and without unused or redundant code. Please remove commented out code that isn’t running (to help our graders)	
                (up to -3 points)</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Extra credit</td>
            <td>Up to 10 points</td>
            <td><ul>
                <li>Students completed various EC options according to the specifications above.</li></ul>
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

## What to Turn In
1. Your code as a zip file. This should include all of the files that make your code work.
2. Whether your code runs best on a Windows or a Mac (especially if you created any functionality w/the arrow keys).
3. A link to your video. Make sure that it's publicly viewable -- not just to @u.northwestern.edu b/c faculty don't have access to that domain, unfortunately).
4. An explanation of the features you implemented for the graders (and whether or not you attempted any extra credit. You can do this as a separate text file inside of your zip file or in the submission comments. PLEASE DO NOT FORGET TO TELL USE WHAT YOU IMPLEMENTED — We want to give you credit for the effort that you put into your program.